---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# LOG:: 03 Arrested Development

> C'était un endroit, le cinéma, c'était un territoire.
>
> —Jean-Luc Godard[^07_Treske_Ch4_1]

## Cinematographic Imagery & Kernel Panic

> One of the fascinations about the cinema is that when the lights went
> down, you’re in the dark, director David Lean told Melvyn Bragg on
> ITV’s South Bank Show in 1985. It’s very private and I used to turn
> round and look at that beam going through the tobacco smoke. And it
> still holds a fascination for me. That beam showed me places I’d never
> thought I’d visit. It showed me characters that I’d never meet in my
> ordinary, dull, suburban life.[^07_Treske_Ch4_2]

Being without a body in the dark in a room with many others is the magic
of cinema. It is only the screen and you, the moving pictures, your
eyes, the brain, and its world. Just your mind floating. *Cinema* is a
mode of watching the world un-viewed.[^07_Treske_Ch4_3] You perceive cinema as a
living arrangement of things and ideas.

Through the years, the technological, industrial, and social shifts in
cinema and film have allowed seamless convergence with other media. Not
only is film no longer *filmed* and does not need celluloid as a
physical medium for transporting images or pictures, but cinematic
presentation is no longer bound to a specific architecture and form of
exhibition and consumption. *Cinema* moved to mobile phones and public
facades.

The glamorous world of cinema, its stars and stories, have moved to
streaming platforms with warehouse catalogs of items ready for
continuous automated play in binge-watching. Platform films produced by
streaming capital are entering world-renowned festivals and competitions
in Berlin and Cannes. 2019, just before the pandemic, had already been
declared the year of kernel panic by candy and popcorn-selling cinema
owners in big Western cities. The *blue screen of death*, the sign of an
ultimate system crash on a computer, increases worldwide fear. However,
there are no safety measures for the termination of cinema as a building
and location in the center of the city, a former dispositive which now
appears publicly as abnormal or beyond common interest.

The move of transformed cinematic narrative fictional platform media
into the glamorous hall of fame of the idealized memory of cinema
dominated the Oscars in 2019. By 2024, after the pandemic and amid the
debacle of generative AI, Hollywood (the classic cinema industry) and
capital have found a way to get along with streaming platforms. As the
hype around platforms slows, the world of cinema—its creme de la creme,
its festivals, Cannes—is bringing back its old, recently retired
Gladiators: the stars of what was once the new, innovative cinema of the
1970s (e.g., directors like Francis Ford Coppola), in a celebration
applauded by the stars of social media, the serials of the streaming
platforms and worldwide television, whom nobody knows anymore by name
besides their social media followers.

In his book on 1990s Turkey, Dogan Gürpinar argues that media at the
time manufactured lasting stars.[^07_Treske_Ch4_4] These stars remain prominent in
entertainment even today, three decades later. However, after the 2000s,
especially the 2010s, fame has become fleeting. Social media, now abuzz
with Cannes 2024, thrives on fleeting images. Fame is instant but
quickly forgotten, swept away by autoplay. At Cannes 2024, the afterglow
of films is replaced by selfies with fading stars, a snapshot of a
moment and place. The promenades are now dominated by Turkish TV stars
and influencers plucked from global streaming platforms. Even cinema
itself has become a self-referential fiction, a realm of a thousand
rehashed stories.

How to debug cinema? Could cinema be an institution in which the people
is missing, recalling Deleuze’s note on the creative act?

> And what relationship is there between human struggle and a work of
> art? The narrowest and for me the most mysterious relationship of all.
> Exactly what Paul Klee meant when he said: “You know, the people are
> missing.” The people are missing, but at the same time, they are not
> missing. The people are missing means – it isn’t clear, it will never
> be clear — that the fundamental affinity between a work of art and a
> people that does not yet exist.[^07_Treske_Ch4_5]

*Le cinéma.* Truffaut and Godard called for an ontological
framework—cinema as a formal description of our existence, an
unfulfilled role up to the present. What happens today to cinema
happened nearby in a similar way in the late eighties, with the birth of
cable television and the increasing commodification of Hollywood. The TV
series *Dallas* and *Dynasty* were the newborn rising stars. Televisual
consumption was understood to replace the seventh art. But, as put
simply by Godard, *la télévision fabrique de l'oubli, alors que le
cinéma fabriquait des souvenirs:* television produces forgetting while
cinema produced memories.[^07_Treske_Ch4_6]

At Cannes 2024, cinema, the original grand narrative, celebrated its
survival. In reality, outside of the social media sphere of selfies and
instagram stories

> \[…\] Cinema should have remembered that people still go to spas,
> temples, churches and still crave for a little bit of insulation as
> long as it is coupled with mystery, sour suspense and emotion. The
> cinema theatre could have grown up from a popcorn restaurant to so
> many other things. But now we have a television at a home and a
> television in a darkened room. We have home theaters at all because
> cinema theaters are nothing more. Even commercial jets offer a more
> adventurous experience. \[…\][^07_Treske_Ch4_7]

The size of Ankara’s Roman bath confirms the principle of simple
pleasures…Moviegoers in 2023 showed they crave originality. Sequels and
recycled stories just aren't cutting it anymore. To compete with home
entertainment and streaming giants, cinemas need to offer something new,
exciting, and bursting with ultimately fresh ideas, and not an attempt
to sell to a young generation what has already been sold to an older
generation as innovative (Barbenheimer).

The magic of cinema lies in transporting us to unseen worlds,
introducing us to unique characters and concepts, and sparking emotions:
always a first time. It's about authenticity, not manipulation. It's
about helping us understand the world around us, not simply telling us
what to think. We crave beauty, desire, chills, and giggles: a full
cinematic experience, a story to live.

Remember those films that had everyone talking? The ones that stayed
with us long after the credits rolled, followed by inspiring parodies
and endless discussions? These movies didn't shy away from difficult
topics. They sparked essential conversations on a grand scale. Films
like *Straight Outta Compton* challenged perceptions of race relations,
*Inside Out* tackled mental health in a rarely seen way, and *Wolf of
Wall Street* made us question modern cultural excesses.

Today, cinema feels scattered and unfocused. Yet, the need for powerful,
culture-shifting blockbusters is greater than ever. These can unite us,
spark emotions, and leave a lasting impact on cinematic art for years to
come.[^07_Treske_Ch4_8]

## The Dream Machine Stutters

Cinema, once a wellspring of fresh dreams, seems to have stumbled. The
stories have grown monotonous, mirroring a homogenized reality. We've
either created a version of ourselves based on the silver screen, or the
silver screen now reflects a version of ourselves we've built. This is
cinema's failing. Obviously, the transportive power of cinematic dreams
can't be replicated on a tiny phone screen.

Cinema boasts a history intricately woven with technology and society.
From its very birth, cinema has been entangled with commerce. The
Lumiere brothers, Edison, even Georges Melies – they were all as much
*exploiters and businessmen* as they were inventors. Cinema is more than
just a technical marvel; its development is a complex dance with the
evolution of electronic image reproduction. It's a story of multiple
forces, not isolated inventions. It’s a commercial practice of movement
generation and continuous, attention-grabbing production.

## Cinema's complexities

Cinema has indeed a complex relation to its own history. Jean-Louis
Comolli proposed the concept of *signifying practice,* acts of
meaning-making that people engage in, to address the intricate
relationship between cinema and its history. Comolli argued that a
materialist understanding of cinema's history is impossible without
acknowledging this concept of a practice.[^07_Treske_Ch4_9] In a further theoretical
approach, Jean-Louis Baudry explored the implications of the basic
cinematic apparatus and questioned whether its technical aspects
inherently produce specific ideological effects, and if these effects
are shaped by the dominant ideology of the time.

These theoretical approaches question meaning-making, ideology, social
aspects, and subjectivity within cinema. Such exploration furthermore
prompts a reevaluation of technological communication systems, similar
to what Bertholt Brecht and Raymond Williams did with radio and
television. Williams and Brecht both argued that these technologies were
initially developed without predetermined content. Engineers in Germany
in the late 1920s and early 1930s tried to imagine, in their journal,
the possible use scenarios for a new system of television to be
established, but were far from content programming forms.[^07_Treske_Ch4_10]

> Häufig wird die Ansicht vertreten, dass es für eine erfolgreiche
> Einführung des Fernsehens genügt, wenn die Apparatur genügend weit
> durchgebildet ist, die Schaffung von befriedigenden Fernsehprogrammen
> biete dan keine Schwierigkeiten mehr. Diese Ansicht würde, nachdem
> sich jetzt der Tonfilm durchgesetzt hat, richtig sein, wenn der
> Fernseher ein Ersatz des Lichtspielhauses wäre, und eine gleiche
> Leistungsfähigkeit erreichen könnte, wie die Einrichtung für
> unmittelbare Projektion. Beide Voraussetzungen treffen jedoch nicht
> zu.[^07_Treske_Ch4_11]

The *cinema-machine* itself, considering the conditions that enabled its
development, is shaped by its ongoing changes, adaptations, and
realignments. Stephen Heath highlights how it brings together the
technical and the symbolic, the technological and the ideological,
creating the current ambiguity surrounding the term *apparatus.*[^07_Treske_Ch4_12]
The concept of the classic cinema experience, with its specific
architecture, technology, and storytelling format, might not be the only
way to think about film and cinema. Movies have constantly pushed
boundaries and redefined this structure. From the pioneering work of
Abel Gance with his multi-screen displays to experiments with duration
and audience interaction, the cinema of attractions, expanded cinema,
and exhibition-based cinema movements, film has ventured far beyond the
darkened theater, challenging traditional models of representation,
creating new ways for audiences to engage with film, and breaking with
(and developing) conventions and practices.

Jean-Louis Baudry offered a concept, *dispositif* (derived from the
Latin *dispositio,* for arrangement), that delves into the psychological
impact of cinema on viewers. Drawing inspiration from Plato's allegory
of the cave and Freud's theories of dreams, Baudry finds parallels
between these experiences and the way cinema affects us. For him, the
*dispositif cinema* is a complex web formed by social norms, technical
aspects of filmmaking, and the viewer's own imagination.

The *dispositif* is understood as the nexus of the spatial and technical
arrangement of the apparatus in cinema, which constitutes the cinematic
perception with each screening (and beyond). Independently of the
content conveyed by the media, an ideological effect develops from the
*dispositif*, which aims at both the impression of reality, the quality
of experience, and the suggestion of participation. In other words, it
essentially determines cinematic perception.[^07_Treske_Ch4_13]

The elements of the *dispositif* include, among others, the dark cinema
room, the placement of the audience in it (axial alignment), the film
space inherent in the image, and so on, which together form a
*dispositif* network in connection with the mental disposition of the
audience. The concept brings together elements that were previously
considered separately, such as cinema technology, cultural traditions of
perception and the work of psychological processing.

What is the pleasure of cinema? What desires does it satisfy, and what
is a possible explanation for the reality impression in cinema?

The concept of *dispositif* helps us to understand cinema as a complex
network of diverse elements, including technology, institutions,
discourses and cultural norms—in short, the unsaid as well as the said.
This network shapes how we experience film. If you remove the key
element of physical location from this network, cinema opens up new
possibilities.[^07_Treske_Ch4_14] We can project films onto houses, bodies, or even
ourselves, blurring the line between representation and reality. This
shift can lead to a more immediate and subjective experience,
transcending the limitations of celluloid and objective storytelling.
‘The world is no longer simulated; rather, the possibility of producing
world is demonstrated.’[^07_Treske_Ch4_15]

It is valuable to revisit the works and writings of the 1970s and inhale
its push for a transformative character of cinema that might encompass
new technologies like video, computers, and even light itself.
Electronic media allows cinema to move away from commercial, narrative
formats and to create experiences where the image itself becomes an
active element in space, rather than simply representing something
else.[^07_Treske_Ch4_16] Peter Weibel, Gene Youngblood, and Vali Export envision an
*expanded cinema* that draws inspiration from various art forms and
media, going beyond the traditional film experience.[^07_Treske_Ch4_17] This vision,
which took shape in a pre-digital, analogue era of video, foresaw the
major expansion that cinema would undergo in the decades to come, fueled
by technological and societal changes. As the fight for audiences
continues, waged with television and platforms, cinema constantly needs
to reinvent itself, demonstrating its remarkable adaptability.

The ever-growing landscape of video (moving imagery) media makes it
difficult to define clearly what cinema is. The classic definition is
lost. Vertov’s Kino-eye and Deleuze’s Brain Screen[^07_Treske_Ch4_18] don’t seem to be
sufficient theoretical frameworks or tools anymore. Cinema needs to
maintain specificity and find a way to distinguish itself from other
media, proving its unique value proposition against global technologists
and capitalists.

The traditional way we understand cinema (the *classical dispositif*)
faces a crisis similar to the breakdown of authority and origin
associated with lists and maps.[^07_Treske_Ch4_19] The concept of *World Cinema*
appeared when film theory and culture began to question the very nature
of cinema. This questioning can be seen as a problem of organization:
where does cinema fit as a medium, an institution, a collection of
films? *World Cinema* offers a solution by proposing new ways of
categorizing films. On one hand, *World Cinema* can be seen as an
attempt to restore a unified view of cinema as a whole. It helps redraw
the map of cinema, encompassing its experiential aspects, emotional
impact, and cultural significance. Whether we discuss the crisis of the
*classical dispositif* or the various ways to categorize films, we're
essentially engaged in a process of *spatial ordering*—creating systems
for understanding cinema.

On the other hand, categorization is just the beginning. It's a stepping
stone towards deeper analysis—an intermediate stage. The real goal is to
ask productive questions and move beyond an initial framework to explore
the underlying relationships that shape film. Rather than what or where
is it, the question is, what will come next? How can we use our
accumulated knowledge of the boundaries of cinema for a cinema to come?

## The location of the moving image

In this line of inquiry a question surfaces: Where is the location of
the moving image? Does anybody ever ask such a question, or precisely
this question? Why ask this question? Is there a need for this question,
or does it amount to asking where ‘cinema’ is? There is a place of a
lost cinema in a desert, where somebody speculatively built a gigantic
open air cinema, which slowly now fades away. Google Earth still shows
you its traces in 2024.[^07_Treske_Ch4_20]

But, actually the question is asking for an object: the moving image. It
does not ask where this object is, but rather indirectly looks for its
location. The word *location* from the Latin ‘locus’ refers to a
particular point and, therefore, to a specific coordinate. That means an
exact point and coordinate in an exact descriptive system of an actual
space or environment. Why is this in question?

Several assumptions are at play here. The most basic is that the moving
image is an object, and that this object has a location. A location is a
place or a point in space. Therefore, the moving image has a place, owns
a place, occupies a place, or is placed somewhere. Overall, it is
related to a place.

The most straightforward, most general answer would be that this place
points to what is called cinema, architecture, or a room, or it points
to an object itself, a television, an object placed in a room, or any
kind of screen anywhere by itself or attached—that is, any other object
with an ability to comfort, carry, or host the moving image. Such spaces
or locations are not cinemas.

Cinema and TV don’t describe a specific or precisely defined location,
which would be *the* cinema or *the* TV, and would there be unique. They
don’t lead towards the *locus* but to a *locus*. However, a *locus*
named cinema leads to a specific place described as a cinema, which
might be unique. The cinema, like the theatre, is a building in a city.
In Europe, it is a building in the center of a town. The cinema can be a
part of a building or included in a building belonging to a shopping
mall, a multipurpose center, a museum, a place where people come
together or which many people frequently use, a place where a collective
viewing can take place and be experienced.

The home is a place for the Television. An object listed in a household
register for insurance purposes, attached to walls or placed, set on
stands, amid expanses of furniture.

Cinema and Television are seen in direct relation to a viewer. The
viewer meets with the moving image in the form of presentational
architectures or presentational objects—a device, a carrier with visible
moving imagery, other carriers with invisible, boxed, or stored moving
images. It is a physical activity and experience. Cinema and Television
are old systems in established places with *informed* conditions. Film,
tape, and cassette are carriers of the moving image, which need a kind
of specific machinery to make the moving image visible.

In the 1980s, film history, as taught at numerous film schools, was a
list of films manageable with clear genres and style, relatively easy to
curate in an educational framework.

## Expanded Cinema Stretch

What expands cinema, moving image, and video media is the incorporation
of new technologies like immersive sound, IMAX, 3D, computer-generated
imagery (CGI), and, lately, generative AI, including spatial
explorations in AR, VR, and MR in production and experience. More easily
accessible mobile technologies and a new culture of creation allow more
people to produce and share films. Affordable filmmaking tools and
online distribution platforms have empowered audiences to become
creators, producing such fan-made content as remakes, recuts, and
mashups. Consumption has created influencers in smaller and smaller
social media environments. Audiences are no longer passive consumers.
Online platforms allow for discussions and interaction around films,
shaping their reception while making them, at the same time, a product
to be capitalized upon. Time spent in participation is valuable,
marketable and generates Transmedia storytelling, sequels, adaptations,
remakes, and participative forms with growing blogs, social media
outlets, and new spaces embedded in cinematic universes for sharing as
integral to the production process and the underlying expanding business
model.

*Cinema* needs to embrace its evolving nature, redefine itself in the
context of technologically-driven media developments, and utilize this
drive to expand its expressive potential while staying true to its core
identity and maintaining its connection to the real world. 
>\[*Cinema*\]
is the only aesthetic language suited to the post-industrial,
post-literate, man-made environment with its multidimensional
simul-sensory network of information sources.[^07_Treske_Ch4_21]

The *fusion of aesthetic sensibility and technological innovation*
produces a shift from representing phenomenal reality to representing
human consciousness.[^07_Treske_Ch4_22] Based on assumptions from the experimental
film environment of the 1960s, Gene Youngblood imagined a cinema machine
that aimed at intensifying the level of the cinematographic experience
through greater involvement of our senses—more deeply engaging, for
example, our vision through ultra-high-definition resolutions, or our
hearing through complex sound environments.

**Cinema is no longer rendered optical, it becomes a natural environment
in which our entire body is engaged**

Paratexts accompany other texts to offer a broader discourse and new
interpretations of these texts. They are supposed to intensify the
textual experiences and provide the possibility of a personal path in
the industry-controlled version—a fake cause of being scripted in
advance.[^07_Treske_Ch4_23] Hollywood, however, absorbs home producer practices, using
media expansion in the home or grassroots productions as quasi-open
sources, and operates through a gift economy, as fans do.

A film is part of a cinematic universe. It could be born in any theme
park, continue as a video game, generate a wide range of products linked
to its narrative world, run on a platform as a series, and finally
return to cinemas in town as a film, or in shopping malls as a comic or
novel. Simple examples are the universes of Marvel and Disney or movies
like *The Pirates of the Caribbean* and *Star Wars*.

The 1970s also predicted the merge with computer and digital technology.
The digital image supports the creation of algorithmic-based worlds,
leaving any mold of the real world aside. Through the digital, film
ceases to be a direct witness of real events.

Cinematic narration continues to function as a model.[^07_Treske_Ch4_24] The shift to
digital inaugurates a new mode of representation. Even when all images
are artificial and algorithmically generated, it is the process through
which we, the audience, understand what is shown to us as real, and this
is the same as the process set into motion by the cinematographic
picture. Digital images have allowed cinema to expand and acquire new
possibilities. However, it must still define where it is or what cinema
is.

The immersive documentary *32 Sounds* by Sam Green[^07_Treske_Ch4_25] and *Eno*, the
generative documentary on Brian Eno by Gary Hustwit in 2024[^07_Treske_Ch4_26] are
remarkable steps in a direction of newness in bringing *sensory
experience, aesthetic sensibility and technological innovation* to
global attention, reformatting the documentary narrative format.[^07_Treske_Ch4_27]

In its most and least problematic context, its most profound and its
poorest, the domain of cinema is nothing but moving images displayed on
a screen. Maybe it will be wise to follow Serge Daney and choose the
term visual rather than image.

•

## The Snackification of Cinema?

What if, from its very inception, cinema was—and still is—precisely a
way of organizing masses of human beings into processes of imagining,
producing, and exchanging stories and images that, at the same time,
solicit our sense of futurity while foreclosing our hopes that we might
ourselves be agents of that future?

Cinema makes us modern, and it does so by announcing to us that the
future is already here. Naturally, then, what usually follows this
future-that-is-already-here is nothing short of apocalypse—an apocalypse
we can only imagine resolving itself in our favor through some heroic
return to a recognizable, if reconfigured, *Edenic, Shangri-la,
Heaven-on-Earth*, a long-gone past.

In a 2014 talk at the German Film Academy, the film producer and
screenwriter James Schamus argued that cinema is a double-edged sword:
it allows us to dream and fantasize, but the very technology behind it
reflects the potential for destruction.[^07_Treske_Ch4_28]

Why, he asks, does nobody seem concerned that Georges Méliès' *A Trip to
the Moon* ends in violent war? Similarly, why do so many films,
including *Interstellar*, depict the future as destruction and a return
to our past social structures, often emphasizing rural life? Cinema's
focus on individual heroes reinforces the idea that we cannot envision a
collective future, one we build together. Eisenstein already detected a
fascinating contradiction in Hollywood's rise. D.W. Griffith's films
showcased the towering skyscrapers and bustling capitalism of New York
City. Yet, the characters seemed trapped in a narrow, almost Dickensian
mindset. Modernity existed alongside a surprising parochialism. Fast
cars zipped by, yet traffic crawled, and the high-rise apartments held
on to small-town sensibilities, with doilies and faux-Victorian
furniture. Siegfried Kracauer, influenced by Marcel Proust, took a
different approach. He viewed the camera as a *death-machine,* in a
positive light; by capturing and presenting the world, it inevitably
alienated and objectified what we see. However, this *death* of our
usual perception allowed us to notice the overlooked and forgotten
aspects of our surroundings. The camera forced us to see anew. For
Kracauer, cinema's photographic nature was the key to breaking free from
the limitations of traditional art. Traditional art, he believed,
limited the world through rigid structures, with tragedy as the prime
example. Cinema, even when striving for tragic closure, had a built-in
escape. It could capture the mundane and the overlooked alongside grand
narratives, creating a unique balance.

In the digital age, Kracauer's valued balance between recording reality
and shaping it through form is fading. The photographic, indexical
function of cinema, the ability to capture the world, appears to be
disappearing. To truly envision a future for cinema, we need to break
free from simply recycling a decaying past. We need films that genuinely
contemplate the future, not just regurgitate tired tropes.

Cinema's economic model has undergone a dramatic shift. For decades,
ancillary revenue streams—from video rentals to streaming—were the
lifeblood of the industry. Theatrical releases were often loss leaders,
advertisements to be consumed later on smaller screens. Can the future
of cinema simply be about selling overpriced snacks to a captive
audience? Currently, the *No Outside Food or Drink Allowed* policy seems
like a key pillar of the business model. Is cinema destined to just be
about gathering large crowds to consume popcorn and watch screens?

Historically, cinema thrived as a community event. Double features,
newsreels, and trailers created a shared, plural experience. The
assumption that cinema starts with a singular theatrical experience
followed by a digital afterlife is a recent invention.

One defining characteristic of cinema is that a film's conclusion is
often preordained. Unlike television, which can endlessly adapt and
evolve, cinema starts with an ending in mind. In a world of endless
content, is this inherent finitude a death knell for cinema?

‘It is not that film producers create cinema, but rather that cinema, as
an ideology and institution, produces cinema producers.’[^07_Treske_Ch4_29] Movies
aren't just about visuals, sounds, and emotions. They also create a
complex behind-the-scenes network. This network involves administrators
who translate money, intellectual property, and creative work into
protocols and relationships. These protocols and relationships are then
embedded within the movie itself, designed to travel across different
media platforms. Think of it like a hidden language—a network of
co-production treaties, credit lines, contracts, licensing deals,
special accounts for holding funds, talent agreements, and even
marketing tools, all working together to create and target audiences.

Traditionally, cinema expertise is seen as existing on a spectrum
between *artistic merit* and *commercial success*. This creates a false
dichotomy. The assumption is that focusing on artistic merit means the
film won't make money, and vice versa. We see producers as the ones who
have to manage this *art vs. money* balancing act.

However, the reality is that cinema itself exposes this as a myth. *Art*
and *money* aren't opposites; they actually depend on each other. Art,
when present in a world where everything can be reduced to a price tag,
allows us to imagine human creativity as something *priceless*,
something beyond mere exchange value. At first glance, cinema might
appear as a vanishing pool for financial resources. Investment pours in,
and the films themselves become part of our cultural landscape. This
artistic aspect of cinema seems to reject the idea that money is the
only way to envision the future. This perspective is an illusion. It
reinforces the notion that a world dominated by money, practicality, and
logic is the only *real* world. This *real world*, in reality, can often
feel like a dystopian nightmare of exploitation, destruction, and a
warped sense of reality.

The logic used by governments to monitor threats is eerily similar to
how companies like Netflix predict user choices. The effectiveness of
this method relies on users believing they have free will, while their
options are subtly manipulated. This mirrors corporate-controlled
elections, where voters are presented with limited choices. As these
predictive technologies become more refined, the future of cinema seems
tied to a shrinking window of possibilities. The very concept of a
future built on diverse choices seems to be replaced by a series of
immediate decisions. The idea of a *cinematic citizen* who can watch
films without being tracked and predicted is a point of resistance
against this reality. Cinema can be a tool to imagine and resist the
predicted future.[^07_Treske_Ch4_30]

## We are Visually Sophisticated and Visually Illiterate 

Film blogger Tony Zhou published a video analyzing director Michael
Bay's signature style, which he humorously calls *Bayhem*. Bay's
technique includes rotating shots, multiple moving elements, and low
angles, which Zhou argues are often used without a clear purpose,
resulting in a lack of substance and meaning in the story. Zhou believes
this style is popular because people can process visual information
quickly but need help to think critically about what an image means.
Regular consumption of images and photographs does not necessarily or
naturally develop visual literacy. It needs to be taught. People are
visually sophisticated when using various mobile phone apps to achieve
particular effects like nostalgia, or to emulate film or force focus on
an element. Still, they often need a deeper understanding of why they
are using these techniques. Visual literacy is not just about
appreciating the technical aspects of photography, but also about
understanding the context and meaning behind an image.

‘It’s fun to be sophisticated, but it’s dumb to be illiterate.’[^07_Treske_Ch4_31]

•

## on cinema alone or the uniqueness of cinema

> The cinema was only really alone, truly alone, between the arrival
> of the sound film and the arrival of television, which more or less
> applies to what André Bazin called the cinema of reality (even if his
> description has assumed many more definitions than he could have
> imagined).[^07_Treske_Ch4_32]

Despite having different goals, cinema and television developed in
tandem. Television's roots go back to the silent film era, or deeper in
time, with advancements then happening in the US, England, and Germany.
While sound film initially overshadowed television's potential, both
technologies continued to evolve. Unchallenged, cinema would reign
supreme. The fusion of image and sound, encompassing dialogue, effects,
and music, birthed a revolutionary *realism* unlike anything ever
experienced. Television, with its distinct apparatus, had yet to emerge
as a competitor. Sound film altered fundamentally our experience of
moving pictures. Voice and sound became *a new dimension of the visual
image*. Sound ‘makes visible in itself something that did not freely
appear in the silent film, effectively denaturalizing’ the visual
image.[^07_Treske_Ch4_33] The established order is disrupted; the image is no longer
simply *seen* while speech is *read*. Instead, the *speech-act becomes
visible at the same time as it makes itself heard*, and the visual image
itself becomes *legible as such*.[^07_Treske_Ch4_34] This shift from classic to modern
cinema, as Deleuze terms it, involves a *new use of the talking \[sic\],
sound and the musical*. Sound becomes more independent, with a tendency
towards *free indirect discourse,*[^07_Treske_Ch4_35] where the image carries the
weight of meaning rather than the spoken word.

Such transformation elevates the image's role; it becomes *readable* in
a new way. The *speech-act* itself becomes *an autonomous sound image*.
Bellour further connects this development to television, suggesting that
television represents a *second stage* of sound film. While television
enabled this evolution, it failed to exploit its own creative potential,
necessitating cinema to provide a *pedagogical lesson*.[^07_Treske_Ch4_36]

To understanding cinema's unique qualities, Bellour argues for a
perspective rooted in the personal experiences and deep love for film
held by French cinephiles, particularly those associated with the
influential magazine *Cahiers du cinéma*. Following the ideas of André
Bazin and the *Politique des Auteurs* approach, this movement championed
Hollywood's classical era and the second stage of sound film. Filmmakers
like Rossellini, Renoir, Hitchcock, Hawks, Welles, and Bresson became
central figures in their discussions. The journal's focus reflected a
growing recognition of film's distinct artistic character. This
awareness coincided with a decline in cinema's dominance as a medium,
leading to a heightened appreciation for its unique qualities.
Filmmakers like Jean-Marie Straub and Jean-Luc Godard aimed to preserve
the distinctiveness of cinema and film.

Bellour's concept of *cinema, alone* is intricately linked to the notion
that cinema's unique identity began to fade as its self-awareness and
appreciation blossomed. The core idea is to safeguard cinema's unique
character across all its transformations and challenges. Such a
perspective raises a critical question: how does contemporary cinema
relate to its original form? The introduction of sound, for instance,
brought the element of time to film, and filling this time necessitates
a viewer capable of piecing together the film's information as a whole.

Chris Marker's *Level Five* may not be his best film, but it is, for
Bellour, significant in its own right. It is the first example of a film
that creates an intimate relationship between memory, image creation,
and the computer as a machine and *dispositif, t*hrough the practice of
the filmmaker Marker. This film opens a wound in the *cinema-dispositif*
and places itself within it.

*Level Five* was made simply and modestly, using a single room and no
crew. Marker claims that this approach allows for a new intimate,
solitary filmmaking practice. He further claims he opened up …

> one of several possible kinds of cinema, that's all…You could never
> make Lawrence of Arabia like this. Nor Andrei Rublev. Nor Vertigo. But
> we possess the wherewithal—and this is something new—for intimate,
> solitary film-making. The process of making films in communion with
> oneself, the way a painter works or a writer, need not be now solely
> experimental (qtd. in Walfisch).[^07_Treske_Ch4_37]

While working on his CD-ROM project *Immemory* [^07_Treske_Ch4_38], Chris Marker also
explored the concept of cinema's future within the CD-ROM’s *Cinema*
section. He ponders the possibility that cinema may have reached its
full potential, paving the way for something new. Marker quotes Jean
Prévost, who suggests death isn't a tragedy, but rather a reunion with
all that's been loved and lost. In the same way, cinema's potential
demise could be seen as a vast memory, an honorable fate.

Even though cinema may seem lost, it's constantly reignited by
exceptional films that continue to be made.[^07_Treske_Ch4_39] These films deliver on
the core promises and possibilities that cinema, as a unique medium, has
always offered. I am thinking of Peter Tscherkassky’s film work, or the
2023 *Anatomy of a Fall* by Jutine Triet, narrating and performing
so-not-seen kinds of cinema.

![](imgs/Treske_Image4.png)
Fig. 4. AMPHENOL

Amphenol Corporation is a major producer of electronic and fiber optic
connectors, cable and interconnect systems such as coaxial cables.\[3\]
Amphenol is a portmanteau from the corporation’s original name, American
Phenolic Corp. Amphenol was founded in Chicago in 1932 by entrepreneur
Arthur J. Schmitt, whose first product was a tube socket for radio tubes
(valveholder bases). Amphenol expanded significantly during World War
II, when the company became the primary manufacturer of connectors used
in military hardware, including airplanes and radios. From 1967 to 1982
it was part of Bunker Ramo Corporation. The company sells its products
into diverse electronics markets, including military-aerospace,
industrial, automotive, information technology, mobile phones, wireless
infrastructure, broadband, medical, and pro audio. Operations are
located in more than 60 locations around the world.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_1]: Engl.: *It was a place, cinema, it was a territory.*

[^07_Treske_Ch4_2]: Elaine Lennon, David Lean, Historical Journal of Film, Radio and
    Television Vol. 35, Iss. 2,2015. Pages 382-384 | Published online: 22 April 2015, http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs 10.1080/01439685.2015.1030221?scroll=top&needAccess=true&journalCode=chjf20.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_3]: Stanley Cavell, The World Viewed. Reflections on the Ontology of Film, Harvard University Press 1979.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_4]: Dogan Gürpınar, Küstah ve Cüretkar: Türkiye'nin Doksanlı Yılları, Telematik Kitap 2022.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_5]: Gilles Deleuze, “What is the Creative Act?”, Conference given on 17 March 1987 in the Tuesday lecture series at the FEMIS film foundation. Revised transcription and translation by Charles J. Stivale. https://deleuze.cla.purdue.edu/lecture/lecture-01-21/ Last accessed 9 January 2025.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_6]: T. Murray, R. Célestin and E. DalMolin, Introduction. Sites: The Journal of Twentieth-Century/Contemporary French Studies Revue d’études Français, 4(2), 2000, 243–248. https://doi.org/10.1080/10260210008456029.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_7]: Abhinav Prayas, Cinema. From the Museum of Vestigial Desire. 2013.
    https://museumofvestigialdesire.net/books/cinema, accessed 12 March 2025.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_8]: Brian Raftery, Could This Be the Year Movies Stopped Mattering?, Wired. 26 August 2016
    https://www.wired.com/2016/08/do-movies-still-matter-2016/, accessed 12 March 2025.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_9]: Teresa de Lauretis and Stephen Heath (eds.), The Cinematic Apparatus, New York: St. Martin's Press, 1980: 6/7.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_10]: Andreas Treske, Fernsehen - Eine Zeitschrift - Ein Verein: Beiträge Zur Fernsehdiskussion Aus Der Zeitschrift "Fernsehen" Von 1930 Und 1932. Forschungsschwerpunkt Massenmedien u. Kommunikation an d. Univ., Gesamthochschule, 1986.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_11]: Rudolph Thun, Die Bedeutung des Programms für einen Erfolg des Fernsehens, In: Treske, Andreas. Fernsehen - Eine Zeitschrift - Ein Verein: Beiträge Zur Fernsehdiskussion Aus Der Zeitschrift "Fernsehen" Von 1930 Und 1932. Forschungsschwerpunkt Massenmedien u. Kommunikation an d. Univ., Gesamthochsch, 1986. p. 34: It is often held that for the successful introduction of television, it is sufficient if the equipment is sufficiently developed, and the creation of satisfactory television programs will then no longer pose any difficulties. This view would be correct, now that sound films have become widespread, if television were a replacement for the cinema and could achieve the same performance as direct projection equipment. However, neither of these assumptions is true. (Translation by the author).

[^07_Treske_Ch4_12]: Teresa de Lauretis and Stephen Heath (eds.) 1980.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_13]: Knut Hickethier, Dispositiv Fernsehen, Skizze eines Modells, In: montage AV. Zeitschrift für Theorie und Geschichte audiovisueller Kommunikation, Jg. 4 (1995), Nr. 1, S. 63-83. DOI: 10.25969/mediarep/483.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_14]: Valie Export. Expanded Cinema as Expanded Reality. Senses of Cinema. October 2003. https://www.sensesofcinema.com/2003/peter-tscherkassky-the-austrian-avant-garde/expanded\_cinema/

[^07_Treske_Ch4_15]: Valie Export 2003.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_16]: Valie Export 2003.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_17]: Gene Youngblood, Expanded Cinema, 1st ed. New York: Dutton, 1970.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_18]: The Brain is the Screen. Interview with Gilles Deleuze. Originally published as ‘Le cerveau, c’est l’écran’ in Cahiers du cinéma 380, February 1986, the result of a roundtable with Alain Bergala, Pascal Bonitzer, Marc Chevrie, Jean Narboni, Charles Tesson and Serge Toubiana on the occasion of the publication of Deleuze’s *Time-Image* (Minuit, 1985), translated by Marie Therese Guirgis.
    https://www.diagonalthoughts.com/?p=2252, accessed 12 March 2025.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_19]: Vincent Hediger, What Do we Know When We Know Where Something Is? World Cinema and the Question of Spatial Ordering. Screening the Past.
    http://www.screeningthepast.com/issue-37-aesthetic-issues-in-world-cinema/what-do-we-know-when-we-know-where-something-is-world-cinema-and-the-question-of-spatial-ordering/, accessed 12 March 2025.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_20]: Messynessy. The Abandoned Secret Cinema of the Sinai Desert. 8 February 2018.
    https://www.messynessychic.com/2014/03/06/the-abandoned-secret-cinema-of-the-sinai-desert/, accessed 12 March 2025.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_21]: Francesco Casetti, The Lumière Galaxy: Seven Key Words for the Cinema to Come, Columbia University Press, 2015. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.7312/case17242. Accessed 9 January 2025: 102 -110.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_22]: Youngblood 1970.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_23]: Jonathan Gray, Show Sold Separately: Promos, Spoilers, and Other Media Paratexts, NYU Press 2010.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_24]: D. N. Rodewick, The Virtual Life of Film, Harvard University Press 2007.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_25]: 32 SOUNDS. A film by Sam Green. 2022. https://32sounds.com/.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_26]: Eno. A film by Gary Hustwit. 2024. https://www.hustwit.com/eno.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_27]: Kevin Nguyen, Eno documentary: behind the first generative feature film - The Verge.
    https://www.theverge.com/24197153/eno-documentary-generative-film-gary-hustwit-interview, accessed 18 August 2024.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_28]: James Schamus, 23 Fragments on the Future of Cinema, German Film Academy 2014, http://filmmakermagazine.com/92531-23-fragments-on-the-future-of-cinema/\#.VMIwuBYznG2, accessed 12 March 2025.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_29]: Schamus 2014.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_30]: Schamus 2014.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_31]: Allen Murabayashi, We are Visually Sophisticated and Visually Illiterate. PetaPixel. Published on July 15, 2014, http://petapixel.com/2014/07/15/visually-sophisticated-visually-illiterate/, accessed 12 March 2025

[^07_Treske_Ch4_32]: Raymond Bellour, in: Alphaville: Journal of Film and Screen Media, Issue 5, Summer 2013.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_33]: The Deleuze Seminars. Cinema and Thought / 18. APRIL 16, 1985, https://deleuze.cla.purdue.edu/lecture/lecture-18-5/, accessed 12 March 2025

[^07_Treske_Ch4_34]: Gilles Deleuze, Cinema I: The Movement Image. U of Minnesota Press, 1986-89. Page 232.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_35]: Deleuze 1986.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_36]: Bellour 2013.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_37]: Raymond Bellour, Cinema, Alone/Multiple Cinemas, Alphaville: Journal of Film and Screen Media. Issue 5, Summer 2013. https://www.alphavillejournal.com/Issue5/PDFs/ArticleBellour.pdf, accessed 12 March 2025.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_38]: Chris Marker, Immemory, CD-ROM, FIlm 1997.

[^07_Treske_Ch4_39]: Bellour 2013.
