---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# LOG:: 04 Melody of Life

> Uncle Wendel, Uncle Wendel! Just look at the soap bubbles, the
> wonderful colours! But where do the colours come from?
>
> —Kurd Lasswitz, On the soap bubble
>
> We are in open circuits.
>
> —Nam June Paik 1970

The concert. Tuning in. Chorus. Noise, cacophony. Mushrooms making
music, spores jumping. Atoms spinning. A fly. Dancing all night long.
Spin me around. Sound and color. Synesthesia. Elan Vital. Energy.
Excess.

My essay *Video Theory* started with a dream-like imagination of all
videos ever made in the world seen together as a blue, not gray, ocean.
I did not reflect on sound, on any sound related to this imagination of
an ocean of video. Of course, this might first appear as chaos, a
cacophony, a wildness, disturbing and maybe even painful. The amount of
video now surrounding us furthermore calls to mind rather a tsunami, not
a storm: gigantic waves, regional platform floods.

If videos have a single sound, patterns of videos together could realize
melodies. Positive imagined. As videos are not seen together, as they
develop in time, even considering that they are built on simultaneity
and the instant, still, over time they create a melody of life. So,
wouldn’t it be nice if all videos create a kind of music? Don’t they
hold the potential for a symphony representing the world? That might be
the music of the planet, the music of our world and the music of us,
representing a unique and ever-changing experience, a symphony of blue.
But, maybe we need to be alien to this world to identify this sound and
music, the signal in the ether.

## Video Worlds / Video Sphere 

The imagination of a music of the world of all videos and moving images,
or *visuals* together over time, recalls the concept by the biologist
Jakob Johann von Uexküll of *Umwelt* and his extensive use of musical
metaphor.[^08_Treske_Ch5_1] Influenced by Leibniz and his idea of the individual as
entangled in a network of relationships and perspectives through which
one defines oneself, and whose manifold reflections in consciousness
constitute the fullness of his worldview, Uexküll described the plan of
nature as constituting a kind of melody, a *Melody of Life*.

> Every animal has an Umwelt, surrounding and enclosing it, much like a
> soap bubble. Each animal has its own Umwelt, and one soap bubble may
> enclose many others within it or be enclosed in other, larger bubbles.
> Unlike Leibniz's monads, these bubbles have windows, or at least
> intersect and interact with each other in concrete ways. The Umwelt is
> not merely given, but rather produced by the animal through the
> functioning of its body, its sensory and instinctual apparatus, and
> the objects it encounters.[^08_Treske_Ch5_2]

A *monad* (from the Greek *monas,* *unit*) is an elementary individual
substance that reflects the world's order and from which material
properties are derived. In Leibniz’s system of metaphysics, monads are
essential substances that make up the universe, but that, lacking
extension in space, are thus immaterial. Each monad is a unique,
indestructible, dynamic, soul-like entity.[^08_Treske_Ch5_3]

The bubbles, the *Umwelt,* around each animal may not be monads. Still,
they exist in a pre-established harmony in the composition of nature.
This harmonious composition constitutes the plan of nature, or a natural
musical score. Deleuze characterized Uexküll as a *Spinozist of
affects.*[^08_Treske_Ch5_4] Every animal behavior signifies—and this signification
differentially constitutes—its *Umwelt* as a meaningful world for it and
others capable of interpreting the signs, animals, or even humans. Every
animal has sensors that report the state of the *Umwelt* and effectors
that can change parts of the *Umwelt*. Uexküll distinguished the
effector as the logical opposite of the sensor or sense organ. Sensors
and effectors are linked in a feedback loop. Sensor input is processed
by a *Merkorgan* (memory organ) and effectors are controlled by a
*Werkorgan (working organ)*. The modern term *sensorimotor* used in
enactive theories of cognition encompasses these concepts.[^08_Treske_Ch5_5]

Uexküll proposes a distinction within the *Umwelt*. The *Umgebung*
refers to the distant aspects of the external world, or the
*surroundings* as a whole. In contrast, the *Innenwelt* (inner world)
represents the immediate sensory data picked up by the organism. This
sensory data is considered the only unfiltered reality directly
accessible to the organism. The organism must learn during infancy how
the indirect and processed information of the *Umgebung* relates to the
direct and unprocessed information of the *Innenwelt*. This relationship
between these two aspects of experience is significant for understanding
later theories of embodied cognition. This idea connects to Kant's
distinction between phenomena, or beings of sense, and noumena, beings
of understanding or reason. However, it's derived from the limitations
of our senses, not philosophical arguments. The concept we call a
*feedback loop* is similar to what Uexküll called a *function-circle*.
Here, *circle* seems to represent a broader concept like *system*.
Interestingly, his term *melody* refers to something close to what we
now call an *algorithm*. To link to Uexküll's *Umwelt* concept, we need
to have an environment with movement and flow, a signal of change, and a
perception of surroundings to act upon. For Uexküll, species are
constitutive of the milieus they occupy. In this milieu, objects are
opportunities for engagement.

Music is the nature of life itself.

Video has gone from being a way to store events (like on old tape) to
being a central part of our lives. It's not just a tool anymore, it's a
world around us. We're constantly surrounded by videos. We are living in
a video sphere. *Spheres* is an intrigue concept by Peter Sloterdijk to
explain our digital world.[^08_Treske_Ch5_6] Think of Earth's layers: the solid
ground, the layer of life, and the atmosphere. Sloterdijk talks about
these and other *spheres* like the *noosphere* (the sphere of reason,
Teilhard de Chardin) and the *semiosphere* (the sphere of signs and
communication, Juri Lotman). Our digital world, as *infosphere*,
connects for him to the old idea of the *firmament* - a giant dome in
the sky where God lived. Just like the breakdown of the firmament led to
the modern world, Sloterdijk suggests our technology might be creating a
new kind of *firmament* around us, one that's constantly changing and
growing.

Thinking about video as part of this *infosphere, firmament* or *Umwelt*
makes the *visual* seem like a living, breathing thing. It's constantly
evolving and interacting with itself, just like a complex organism we
are observing. It makes us curious to know what takes place in its
dynamics—how waves are created and constantly evolving. There appears to
be a system that can build and maintain itself constantly, an autopoetic
system, as Niklas Luhmann described.[^08_Treske_Ch5_7] *Autopoiesis* means
*self-creation* in Greek. The term was originally used for living things
like cells to point to how they constantly replace parts while keeping
their overall form. Two Chilean biologists, Maturana and Varela,
explained, in 1972, autopoietic systems as self-contained networks.
These networks use their elements to rebuild themselves and create the
space where those elements exist. In simpler terms, the system makes its
own building blocks and uses them to remain itself. This concept can be
applied beyond biology. Luhmann argued that societies are also
autopoietic. They function by creating their own elements, like temporal
communication events, from within their existing structures. These
events are fleeting moments, not permanent things, temporal and
ephemeral. For a society to keep existing, it needs to constantly
generate new elements. These communication events don't have meaning on
their own, but gain significance through their connection to other
communication within the system. Think of a conversation: a single word
doesn't make sense by itself, but within a flow of conversation it
contributes to the bigger picture.

Luhmann argues that social elements, like people and actions, aren't the
building blocks of society. Instead, he proposes communication events as
the key element. Societies, in essence, are self-sustaining networks of
communication.

>Social systems use communications as their particular mode of
autopoietic reproduction. Their elements are communications which are
recursively produced and reproduced by a network of communications and
which cannot exist outside of such a network.[^08_Treske_Ch5_8]

Breaking away from a common view of communication, Luhmann draws on Karl
Bühler's ideas and defines communication as three elementary things
working together: what's said (information), how it's said (utterance),
and how it's interpreted (understanding).

Information, according to Shannon and Weaver, is choosing something to
say from all the possibilities. Every act of communication picks a
message from all options. Utterance is why and how something is
communicated. It's like picking a specific way and reason to say
something out of all the possibilities. Understanding is the difference
between what's said and how it's said. To understand something, you have
to separate the message itself from how and why it's delivered.
Understanding is also choosing a specific way to interpret that
difference. Instead of focusing on what the speaker meant, Luhmann flips
it around: the meaning is ultimately decided by how it's understood. He
says communication works *from behind*, meaning that understanding
shapes the meaning, not the other way around. This is like the principle
of hermeneutics, where the listener, not the speaker, decides the
meaning. The listener's understanding limits the possible meanings, no
matter what the speaker intended.[^08_Treske_Ch5_9]

## Video vs. Cinema (Film again)

Sound and music drive online video. Sound drives the TikTok platform par
excellence. Video is related to music, objects of engagement, and the
environment or milieu as physical spaces. Digital moving images are
closer to sound than to visual images. They appear as a time-based
signal of presence, simultaneity, and instants. Playing video is a flow
of time, similar to a melody. A single video might be a single sound,
even a note, but we realize a melodic form in all videos. This is an
abstract layer of perception, a transformation outside of the experience
focusing on flow and autoplay, instantly swiping away the current video.

The emergence of video sparked a dramatic change in how we experience
images and their relationship to time. Unlike film, video emphasizes the
concept of *the instant*. A cinematic image, despite depicting movement
through a series of connected frames, remains a fixed composition—a
captured and frozen moment. It's also a delayed experience, viewable
only after processing. In contrast, video's ability to record and
display images *almost* instantaneously creates a closer connection to
real-time events. This immediacy strengthens the inherent link between
movement and time within the video itself.

The concept of real-time in video is intertwined with the idea of
simultaneity. Filmmakers like Godard, Coppola, and Greenaway explored
this notion in their work. In contrast to film as celluloid, video
allows further a dissimulation of the beginning and ending of a shot.
Thus did video technology, even in its early analog development,
dissolve temporal and spatial unity. Video allows one to intrude, to
interrupt and reformat, the streaming of flows. It defines a capacity to
act on time and in relations between flows, between different rhythms
and *durations*. While cinema relies on editing to connect images and
sounds, with a (sometimes implicit) sense of narrative continuity even
through cuts, video can handle actions *simultaneously* without
requiring cuts themselves.

Real time is synchronous time. My time here and there, in different
places, now in this instant, either slow or fast, either jumping,
disconnected and continuing, fluid, streaming.

Nam June Paik has pointed out continuously that video is not about
physical space, but about time. His work challenges the idea that video
is just a way to record things at home. Video, especially in its early
analog form, could create entirely new visual experiences.

Chris Marker experimented with storytelling and memory. He used the past
not just to reminisce, but to think about the future. He manipulated
real footage to make a point about historical events. His techniques are
all about using technology to tell stories. Marker's last film, *Level
5* (1996), uses all sorts of images: still photos, film clips, computer
graphics, video footage, found footage, interviews, articles, and even a
character named Laura (played by Catherine Belkhodja). Laura talks to an
unseen man who might be dead, or it could be Marker himself filming her,
or even the audience. The film starts with a close-up of a hand using a
computer mouse, and then we see the computer screen with city lights
overlaid on a computer-generated head. In his own unique vision, Marker
mixes real and imagined elements to create a new kind of cinema, one
that tells stories in a new way and uses new kinds of images that are
neither completely true nor completely false. Marker's methods point to
the future of digital storytelling, even as it references the very
beginnings of cinema, where moving images were first created from still
photographs.

The digital confronts us with a new form of realism. Images and sounds
are built based on algorithms processed by a machine, a black box of
code, learning and traversing human data and information, presented or
embedded in new video media, a motion signal derived from mathematical
formulae.

The still image, the photographic image, the film frame: all are always
related to a specific time continuum, and never to the now. Even if the
film plays now, what is reproduced is a recorded performance, not a new
performance; the object performs the new, which refers to the operation
but not to the content, not to what is inside the frame or what is
projected. What is projected is a specific registration; it does not
develop something new. It is limited, and has borders. It has a defined,
fixed body; the photograph is an attempt to resolve a specific condition
and keep this condition existing.

The feed or the algorithmic timeline cannot be compared with the filmic
or cinematic timeline; it is not object-based and, therefore, lacks
borders. The algorithm constantly evaluates, observes, and receives;
hence, it is never cinematic. Cinematic is a specific style, a form, a
format, or a phrase: narrative and structure. The web, the digital
sphere itself, develops non-cinematically.

Video is about being present. It emphasizes event character and
participation. Cinema includes only indirect participation as an
inactive receiver: passivity. Video is a feedback system that suggests
input and reverse response. The signal produces a constant now in a
defined area of variability; the definition itself is variable.

## frameMusic Silence

This reminds me of something Theodor Adorno said about popular music. He
thought popular music was too standardized, meaning all its songs
sounded pretty similar. There were no surprises, because we're trained
to expect certain things from popular music. For Adorno, classical music
was the opposite. It required you to pay close attention, because every
single note mattered in the whole piece.

Basically, the music industry has dumbed things down. People might be
really into their favorite bands and know all the details, but overall,
the experience is pretty shallow.

Imagine our phones and computers as windows into a world dominated by
video. Streaming services and social media are constantly showing us
videos, creating an environment where everything is a moving image.
These videos are not just things we watch; they are connected to each
other and can even react to what's around them. The way these platforms
use algorithms to recommend videos is becoming more and more uniform,
which is similar to what Adorno worried about with popular culture: that
everything would become the same, which is a recipe for, in Benjamin’s
thought, *poverty*.

## The Idea of Silence and the Digital Frame in Video

Imagine incorporating the ideas of composer John Cage into the way we
think about video and the dynamics of the *visual*. Cage's concept of
silence isn't total quiet, but rather a system that allows for its own
natural sounds to emerge. It's akin to a kind of artificial awareness
that comes from letting things be.[^08_Treske_Ch5_10] In the future, composers would
work with tiny fractions of a second, similar to how film editors use
frames. Music could be created like a movie, with a system responding to
what happens around it. The composer could even incorporate unexpected
events into a piece.

Thinking about video in the digital world, it's like a complex dance of
events, constantly changing at incredible speeds. Digital information is
made up of tiny, distinct pieces, similar to the sprocket holes on film.
The frame in a movie is, for Gilles Deleuze, a system holding lots of
information. Each frame captures a moment with various elements like
actors, setting, and lighting. This information can be changed by how
the shot is framed, by transitions, or by light and shadow. Even the
camera angle and filming techniques affect what information the frame
carries. This information can also be dynamic, with changes in light and
movement. Deleuze added the idea of the *out-of-frame*: things existing
just outside the shot that still influence what we see.

An environment that's both open and controlled is created, where things
can be copied, contained, yet also manipulated. For Cage, the frame was
a way to structure music, not with traditional notation, but by
borrowing ideas from film editing. It could be a single *unit*
containing the entire piece, or a series of frames building the whole
thing. This frame is flexible, able to hold everything in one shot or be
spread across many. It's not the standard frame you see in a movie, but
an expanded idea that reaches beyond the visible to a larger, virtual
space.

The traditional rectangular screen format is limiting and outdated.
Unlike paintings or photographs, there's no frame in real life. This
rectangle is just a human invention, based on how we see the world when
we hold our head still. If we created the frame, we can get rid of it.
There's no reason to be stuck with this rectangular format in film. It's
time to break free and explore new ways of showing the world on
screen.[^08_Treske_Ch5_11]

Discussions of framing, of course, run across the history of audiovisual
media technologies. Television imposed its format on films until
television itself became, through higher resolutions and LED technology,
more horizontal, rendering the absolute and rigid square obsolete. In
the struggle for audiences, cinema expanded the frame horizontally,
establishing super formats like cinemascope and others. And not so many
years ago, flexible, rectangular, hand-sized-build smartphones
established vertical rectangular formats for social media practices and
stories, a mode of the perceptible that is explicitly about mobile
media, while television continues to move towards scale and home cinema
likeness. It is a matter of the distribution of audiovisual forms, which
becomes less observable if the presenting or the streaming screen format
can be automatically detected and if the source allows reformatting. The
transmission system automatically adapts the content to the available
framing device, which means matching the available surface.

In the Cageian context of an environment, as described essentially by
Uexküll, the presence and absence of something becomes a particular
concern. Presence or absence allows for chance operations in the
environment. The verticality of the frame limits the space to the
subject of interest and emphasizes presence inside the frame. Absence is
the new norm. Cinema generated the possibility of objectivity, while
smart phones produce selfish subjectivity, controlled by design.

## The Age of Now

How do we understand the dynamics of contemporary life, particularly
regarding the role of technology in shaping our perception of time and
space? Paul Virilio’s answer might be the *Instant*.[^08_Treske_Ch5_12] We live in a
time of instant information. News, ideas, and data travel almost
instantly around the globe. This has changed the way we experience the
world. We can be connected to anything, anywhere, at any time. Virilio
believes this *instant* world creates a new reality. In this reality,
distance and time don't matter as much. The physical world and the
digital world blur. We crave speed and efficiency, and everything needs
to be instant. This rush towards immediacy, however, has downsides. It
leads to a world dominated by technology, where people feel disconnected
and isolated.

There's a flip side to speed, though. The faster we go, the more
exhausted we can become. It's like trying to run too fast; eventually,
you have to stop.

Buckminster Fuller used the idea of *frequency* to describe the world.
He saw everything, even solid objects, as made up of tiny, rapid events.
Imagine the white foam of a wave – it looks solid, but it's actually
lots of tiny bubbles moving very quickly. He believed that everything,
even things we can't see, works this way.

Cinema’s frame has an eternal character. Similarly, a computer file
stored on a hard disk or a server seems to have an eternal character.
Frame and file are both objects, which resist the ephemeral of the flow.
Both don’t deliver the possibility of the act in an instant. They are
too slow.

Video, on the other hand, is an electronic means of capturing and
transferring experience. It's faster than any other visual media because
it deals with signals, not objects. Video isn't concerned with creating
a perfect image; it focuses on the flow of information itself. Cinema,
in contrast, is like a game played with images, a specific style with
its own rules.

We tend to be too attached to the traditional image-frame of cinema. But
the future lies in temporary audiovisual experiences, events built from
signals, instants. These signals can carry vast amounts of information,
like a stream of points or pixels, creating a new kind of visual
experience and immediacy. Even signals without a clear message can be
important. They are part of the overall flow of information.

The video artist and scholar Paul Ryan was not at all interested in the
image. Like his friends and colleagues in the early 1970s around
*Radical Software*, he was interested in video as signal and as
ecological system:

>I would avoid the term visual to describe video. You can see a bottle
of perfume, but sight is not the sense it really affects…Video is about
perceiving events with the nervous system, not visualizing in a
pictorial way.[^08_Treske_Ch5_13]

Exploring technology for environmental and local awareness, Ryan merges
video art and environmental education in his work and conceptual
writing. Analog video technology can be seen as a means by which
individuals attend to their local environments. Ryan developed an
*Earthscore* curriculum and a New York City *Ecochannel* for community
members to continually monitor their watersheds, as well as other
educational projects to make non-private ecological information
available anytime and anywhere:

> Give them videotape, audiotape, and film and let them find forms for
> their own experience and their own environs rather than let the
> teacher take the data, inform it, and present it as a precooked packet
> to be warmed over and consumed in the classroom. Self-structuring of
> unprepared data develops the capacity to be your own information
> composer.[^08_Treske_Ch5_14]

Though written around 1970 and limited by the technology of the time,
Ryan's vision for video's potential to democratize information is
strikingly relevant today. Widespread access to new technologies could
empower people to document and share local cultures, fostering a sense
of environmental stewardship. The rise of online platforms and social
media usages aligns perfectly in theory with an idea where individuals
map, record, analyze, and try to raise awareness about their local
environments.[^08_Treske_Ch5_15]

*Earthscore*, published by NASA in 1990, is designed to produce video
content that reflects environmental realities and fosters behaviors that
align with Earth's natural balancing mechanisms, ultimately supporting
global environmental efforts. Its core concept lies in viewing *Earth*
as a complex, self-regulating cybernetic system. Natural systems possess
inherent mechanisms for maintaining balance and adapting to changes
through feedback loops. Environmental problems often arise from
intricate interactions between human and natural systems. *Earthscore*
emphasizes understanding these interactions to develop effective
solutions. By adopting a holistic perspective, cybernetics encourages us
to consider the entire system, rather than isolated components.
Conceptually, Ryan’s *Earthscore* curriculum blends Gregory Bateson's
cybernetics (with its focus on interconnected and self-regulating
systems) with Charles Sanders Peirce's semiotics (a theory of signs and
communication that’s deeply sensitive to the context or environment of
the communicative act) to create a novel system for environmental
videography, as a way of making the acquisition of environmental
knowledge more engaging, interactive, and impactful.

Video is a powerful tool for transmitting information based on a *shared
perception of environmental realities,* rather than a sole reliance on
language. Video offers a unique way to model reality compared to
language—an alternative way and form of communication beyond language,
beyond control and domination, which threaten our planet’s
well-being.[^08_Treske_Ch5_16]

![](imgs/Treske_Image5.png)
Fig. 5. TWIST AND LOCK

A series of connectors used for connecting thinnet coaxial cabling to
various networking components. BNC connectors use a twist-and-lock
mechanism that provides a secure connection between network cabling and
components. BNC connectors are typically used on 10Base2 Ethernet
networks. The different types of BNC connectors include the following:

• BNC cable connector: Soldered or crimped to the ends of a thinnet
cable

• BNC T-connector: Used to connect a network interface card (NIC) to a
thinnet cable segment

• BNC barrel connector: Used to connect two pieces of thinnet cable

• BNC terminator: Provides a 50-ohm termination for the free end of a
thinnet cable4

Often the BNC connector is specified for operation at frequencies up to
4 GHz and it can be used up to 10 GHz provided the special top quality
versions specified to that frequency are used.

However it is wise to fully check the specification.

Basic BNC Specification Summary - Parameter - Specification - Cable Type
Coaxial - Securing - Bayonet fit - Typical operating frequency range 0 -
4 GHz Diameter (Male) 14.0 mm / 0.570 in - Diameter (Female) 11.1 mm /
0.436 in[^08_Treske_Ch5_17]



[^08_Treske_Ch5_1]: Kalevi Kull, Jakob von Uexküll: An introduction, Semiotica, vol. 2001, no. 134, 2001, pp. 1-59, https://doi.org/10.1515/semi.2001.013.

[^08_Treske_Ch5_2]: Brett Buchanan, Onto-Ethologies: The Animal Environments of Uexküll, Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, and Deleuze, State University of New York Press, 2008, 223pp., ISBN 9780791476116.

[^08_Treske_Ch5_3]: Leibniz. Monadology (1714)

[^08_Treske_Ch5_4]: Brett Buchanan, Onto-Ethologies: The Animal Environments of Uexküll, Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, and Deleuze, State University of New York Press, 2008, Reviewed by Robert Vallier, DePaul University 2009.06.08, https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/onto-ethologies-the-animal-environments-of-uexk-252-ll-heidegger-merleau-ponty-and-deleuze/.

[^08_Treske_Ch5_5]: Jakob Johann von Uexküll. Wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki Jakob\_Johann\_von\_Uexküll, 09.01.2025.

[^08_Treske_Ch5_6]: On Life in the Infosphere (Jacob Burda, Luciano Floridi, P.Weibel, P.Sloterdijk, J.Jarvis) | DLD16, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DbQC4WfXxjw, accessed 12 March 2025.

[^08_Treske_Ch5_7]: Clemens Mattheis, The System Theory of Niklas Luhmann and the Constitutionalization of the World Society, Goettingen Journal of International Law 4 (2012) 2, 625-647.

[^08_Treske_Ch5_8]: Niklas Luhmann, Social systems, Stanford, Stanford University Press 1995 \[1984\].

[^08_Treske_Ch5_9]: D. Baecker, Why Systems? Theory, Culture & Society, 18(1), 59-74, 2001, https://doi.org/10.1177/026327601018001005 p66, accessed 12 March 2025.

[^08_Treske_Ch5_10]: David Goldberg, EnterFrame: Cage, Deleuze and Macromedia Director, Afterimage, vol. 30, no. 1, 2002, pp. 8-9, ProQuest, https://www.proquest.com/scholarly-journals/enterframe-cage-deleuze-macromedia-director/docview/212114507/se-2, accessed 12 March 2025

[^08_Treske_Ch5_11]: Peter Greenaway, Toward a re-invention of cinema. Variety Cinema Militans lecture at the Dutch Film Festival on Sept. 27, 2003. https://variety.com/2003/voices/columns/toward-a-re-invention-of-cinema-1117893306/, accessed 12 March 2025.

[^08_Treske_Ch5_12]: Paul Virilio, The Futurism of the Instant: Stop-Eject, Polity, 2010.

[^08_Treske_Ch5_13]: Orit Gat, History Class: Paul Ryan Interviews for Grey Room, https://rhizome.org/editorial/2011/sep/28/recent-history-class-paul-ryan-interviews-grey-roo/, accessed 11 March 2025.

[^08_Treske_Ch5_14]: Paul Ryan, Video Mind, Earth Mind: Art, Communications, and Ecology, a collection of essays from 1968 through 1991, 1993: 31.

[^08_Treske_Ch5_15]: Christopher J. Keller and Christian R. Weisser, eds., The Locations of Composition, Albany: SUNY Press, 2007, Place-Blogging, Geoannotation, and other examples of Environmental Knowing via Locative Media (198/199 Chapter: From Site to Screen, From Screen to Site).

[^08_Treske_Ch5_16]: Elizabeth Swanstrom, Animal, Vegetable, Digital: Experiments in New Media Aesthetics and Environmental Poetics, The University of Alabama Press, 2016: 106/107.

[^08_Treske_Ch5_17]: The Network Encyclopedia,
    http://www.thenetworkencyclopedia.com/entry/bnc-connector/.
