---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# LOG:: 13 Phantom Worlds or even cats watch tv

> This TV should change its form.
>
> —KasputNiK

SCOTT me up, be me![^17_Treske_Ch14_1] *Cats! Cats! Cats! Cats!* Why are all these
people watching cat videos over and over again and again? What is it
that makes cats celebrity brands? People watch cats doing hilarious and
adorable things, strange and cheesy. An Indiana University study reveals
that viewing cat videos *boosts positive emotions and decreases negative
feelings*.[^17_Treske_Ch14_2] Wow! Pleasure!

## SO CUTE

We have to come to terms with our understanding of reality. We are
living in a cold and technical world. Seeing something *cute* is a
relief for a few seconds, a let go from the perfectness, the
operational, and excellence. Sianne Ngai calls it the *erotization of
powerlessness*.[^17_Treske_Ch14_3] Cuteness is not just about cats; it is part of a
system and a matter of politics. Cuteness can be a strategy for
individuals to resist or to gain some kind of status.

An excellence-cuteness syndrome drives our society. Everything is
becoming the same in a world shaped by globalization and neoliberal work
cultures. In the past, people found meaning in their religion and
culture. Now, all we care about is being cute or excellent. But these
don't give our lives any real purpose; they're just shallow ways of
trying to look good. We only want to be cute or excellent to show off;
it's all about ourselves. This obsession with cuteness and excellence is
a form of self-absorption that people and societies use to define
themselves. But who we are is about things that can't be measured, like
our feelings, beliefs, and experiences. Our culture shapes these things.
Importantly, they can't be quantified. Focusing on cuteness and
excellence doesn't connect us to these more profound things. Instead, it
just makes us chase after the latest trends and fads or try to outdo
each other in superficial ways. It doesn't make us feel any better.
Consequently, our obsession with cuteness and excellence can quickly
become an unhealthy habit.[^17_Treske_Ch14_4]

Sianne Ngai offers three categories or keys to how we experience today’s
world as surfacing on social media: *zany blogs, cute tweets and
interesting wikis* are categories creating attention.[^17_Treske_Ch14_5] ‘The best
explanation for why the zany, the interesting, and the cute are our most
pervasive and significant categories is that they are about the
increasingly intertwined ways in which late capitalist subjects labor,
communicate and consume.’[^17_Treske_Ch14_6]

They are the material through which we can have perceptions and share
judgments that seem most closely related to what we do, say, and use in
the 21st century. The *zany* is a performance style that's both anxious
and over-the-top. It's energetic, sometimes even sweaty, and involves
physical humor that can be suggestive. It blurs the lines between play
and work, with elements of both being taken too seriously or not
seriously enough. Think of Lucille Ball's physical comedy or Hugo Ball's
Dada performances. It can be dangerous, like Charlie Chaplin getting
caught in the machinery. The zany is similar to camp, which celebrates
failed attempts at style. But unlike camp, the zany is more likely to
turn success into failure, like the cartoon Coyote's constant struggles.
It's a performance that's either too stiff or loose, creating tension
between different roles or activities. It can be desperate or stressful
but not wildly joyful or chaotic. It's like lousy pornography: trying
too hard and missing the mark. Despite the effort, the zany can be
attractive but never truly happy.

The *zany* concept comes from a stock character in an old theater, a
peasant forced into service. Initially, these characters helped fix
romantic problems, foreshadowing the idea of emotional labor. Over time,
the zany became a comedic figure who exaggeratedly imitated others, a
wild improviser. Today, we see the zany in characters like The Cable
Guy, stuck between different types of work, or Kramer from Seinfeld, an
exaggerated version of Jerry. These characters all represent the idea of
*virtuoso labor* (Lazzarato's immaterial labor), where work becomes a
kind of performance.

C*ute* comes from a sharper, more intense word, *acute*. Cute things are
endearing and familiar, unlike the strange or wild (*zany*) that we keep
at arm's length. We can control and interact with cute things, even
though they need our care. The *zany* is about creation, while the cute
is about enjoyment. It's like the difference between a worker and a
finished product. We identify with cute things; they feel like *us*.

Cuteness is different from beauty. Beautiful things are rare, unique,
and untouchable. Cute things are cuddly and approachable. They can be
mass-produced and kitschy, appealing to our emotions in a simplified
way. Cute objects often want our love and care, like a child asking,
*Are you my mother?*

Cuteness can be a fixation, hiding the work that went into making it.
But it can also be a hopeful dream, a world where things are valued for
their usefulness, not just how much they cost. Cute objects want us to
believe in the fantasy of a perfect thing. They hint at a world where
things are helpful and safe, untouched by the harsh realities of buying
and selling. This powerlessness can be strangely attractive, even
arousing—pure pleasure.

The ultimate test of something being cute might be if it looks good
enough to eat. This sweetness can be unsettling. The transformation of
real work into abstract value (like in factories) can be compared to
turning meat into a pink, formless paste. Cute objects, with their
friendly faces, might be a way to escape this feeling of being used up.
Cuteness makes production seem like a comforting household activity,
even though it can be violent and sexual.

The third aesthetic category by Ngai, *interesting*, is about
information and how it circulates, not about performance or emotions.
It's like a small surprise, a deviation from the norm. Science finds
interesting things that connect many ideas and social aspects.
Interesting things are a balance between understanding and surprise.

The *interesting* is linked to exploring and observing the world, like a
flaneur in a city. Literature, especially modern novels, became
*interesting* through a focus on diverse characters and situations.
*Interesting* things are not universal or timeless; they focus on
everyday details and change over time. *Interesting* things make you
think and question, but the feeling is mild. It's just a starting point
for further exploration.

*Interesting* things happen in a flow of time, unlike the shocking or
beautiful. They reflect the current moment. Photography captures
everything, making it inherently interesting. Conceptual art uses
everyday elements and processes, creating an *information aesthetic*.
*Interesting* things ask you to pay attention to details in a fast-paced
world. This attention might lead to new knowledge and understanding.
Critics can help us see the interesting aspects of things, influencing
public opinion and creating communities with shared interests.

> Diachronic and informational, forensic and dialogic: the aesthetic of
> the interesting can produce new knowledge. From Adorno on the products
> of the culture industry to Cavell on Hollywood screwball comedies \[to
> Ngai on the interesting\], all contemporary criticism is thus, in some
> sense, an implicit provision of evidence for why the object that the
> critic has chosen to talk about is interesting \[...\][^17_Treske_Ch14_7]

The *zany* is a subject, the *interesting* an object, and the *cute* a
hybrid, and all are in between play and labor, signaling an era in which
work becomes play and play becomes work. The three emotional responses
to aesthetics in our modern, service-oriented world aren't grand or
dramatic. Cute things are small and vulnerable, while zany is a feeling
of awkward helplessness. Interesting things are constantly changing
based on what's expected and different. These might seem unimportant,
but they differ significantly from the classical ideas of beauty (calm
and distant) or the sublime (powerful and overwhelming).

Ngai argues that art has become independent and fully integrated into
everyday life. This seemingly utopian outcome is different from what
anyone expected. Art has adapted by becoming less severe and more like a
friendly ghost haunting us. It's still around, but it’s casual and
doesn't demand respect or awe. The part of art that merges with daily
life can even seem like mental health issues. Our interest can become
obsessive boredom, cuteness can feel manipulative, and zaniness can be
like a nervous breakdown. Everyday art is like watered-down versions of
past artistic styles. Cute pictures are like calm landscapes in a
digital format, zany jokes are like short online videos, and interesting
things are like personality quizzes. This connection between art and
information might explain the rise of these new emotional responses. Art
is now tied to performance, products, and information. This reflects
several trends, like the blurring of lines between art and commerce, the
growth of a more personal public life and a commercialized private life,
and the constant activity in both areas that can't be easily called work
or play. While these emotions are less dramatic than the feeling of awe
inspired by classical art, they still challenge traditional ideas of
beauty. *Cute* things get too close, *zany* things aren't truly playful,
and *interesting* things are observed coldly. The way we experience art
just isn't what classical thinkers expected.

> If, in response to the loss of the sacred under conditions of
> secular, industrial modernity, the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
> plunged headlong into the resacralization of the aesthetic, the
> contemporary moment seems defined by a desacralization of the
> aesthetic turn, but a desacralization caused precisely by the
> aesthetic’s hyperbolic expansion.[^17_Treske_Ch14_8]

Hiroki Azuma offered critical insight into the postmodern era by
identifying a shift in Japan during the 1990s. This shift moved away
from grand narratives and embraced a vast database of *cute elements* or
*moe-points*.[^17_Treske_Ch14_9]

Ngai discusses aesthetics in a world dominated by capitalism and
information technology. Her book analyzes aesthetics through the
*interesting* lens, which acknowledges new trends within capitalism. Her
concept of *zany* could have been an alternative way of looking—actively
pushing against and exhausting existing constraints. A *zany aesthetic
theory* could challenge the assumption that capitalism is permanent.

Ngai's work can be connected to a broader concept of *performative
aesthetics*, celebrating the act of creation and embracing the
possibility of failure, similar to *queer art*. The rise of information
technology and control over data streams create a new *vectoralist
class* with immense aesthetic power. Information is a commodity,
changing how we perceive and interact with the world. Ngai's categories
(*zany, cute, interesting*) help navigate this information-driven
landscape. Still, they must be adapted to serve or survive in an
AI-dominated future.

## Phantom Worlds

*Mensch ist was er isst*, says the German proverb: man is what he eats.

In his 1953 essay, *The Phantom World of TV*, the postwar German critic
of mass culture Gunther Anders was among the first to relocate this
proverb onto the terrain of cultural consumption. With the assertion,
*it is through the consumption of mass commodities that mass men are
produced*, Anders suggested that we are what we watch. He was already
wary of the allegedly poor taste and potentially anti-social tendencies
of *mass men*.[^17_Treske_Ch14_10]

‘The world has now become an 'exposition'; and certainly an advertising
exposition that is impossible not to visit, because we always already
find ourselves in the middle of it.’[^17_Treske_Ch14_11]

Television and modern technology are, for Anders, a new form of
*Promethean shame;:* the shame of being confronted by the high quality
of fabricated things compared to natural ones, a discomfort individuals
might experience when faced with the power and influence over their
lives, creating alienation, feelings of powerlessness, loss of control
and disconnection from the world. Existence is technically
mediated.[^17_Treske_Ch14_12]

> Promethean shame is what we feel when we realize that the machines we
> have created are so powerful and perfect that we humans with our messy
> and mortal bodies cannot but feel very deficient in comparison. We
> recognize the superiority of the made over the born, and as a
> consequence wish to be made ourselves, which allows us more control
> over what we are, which is especially important when it comes to our
> sexual bodies.[^17_Treske_Ch14_13]

Key to Anders' notion of *Promethean shame* was his observation that we
effectively adapt or suit ourselves to our technology, not the other way
around. Provocatively, Anders argued that whereas the populace in the
past (he was referring to Nazi Germany) required the techniques of mass
psychology to manipulate and control, today we do this work on
ourselves, in our own time, in our own space, using devices and
subscriptions we pay for.  As we *do this to ourselves*, we actively
*program* ourselves in an ongoing digital practice, constantly and in
real-time, providing the means for our own surveillance.[^17_Treske_Ch14_14]

We are entering into dependencies and addiction without awareness. We
need to check our smart devices constantly. We fear obsolescence and
being left behind. Skills like writing, communication, problem-solving,
orientation, and spatial awareness are dangerously affected and
reformatted. We are under pressure to perform and curate our lives,
construct narratives, and showcase. The feeling of inadequacy leads to
curating identities and idealized images.

Today, all media are social media.[^17_Treske_Ch14_15] We use them to depict ourselves.
Our bodies are now extensions of data networks, clicking, linking, and
taking selfies. We render what we see and understand on screens that go
everywhere with us. This understanding results from a mixture of seeing
and learning not to see.

Anders argued that commercial broadcasting addresses the audience as
consumers of commodities to increase sales. This dynamic is even more
pronounced in today's targeted advertising on digital platforms, where
user data is used to serve personalized ads.

Consuming commercial broadcasts is a form of *camouflaged labor* where
the audience pays to sell themselves to advertisers. In the age of
social media, users' content creation, data generation, and attention is
a form of unpaid digital labor that generates profits for platforms. The
monetization of user data on social media platforms is a form of
commodity production. Boundaries between work and leisure are blurred.
Streaming platforms curate and monetize user attention. The
proliferation of fake news, filter bubbles, and echo chambers on social
media platforms exacerbate this distortion of reality in contemporary
media. Furthermore, the constant use of digital devices, immersion in
virtual worlds, and social media platforms lead to feelings of
estrangement from physical reality.

Technology platforms, the conventional wisdom now goes, are not neutral.
Their design and structure encourage certain behaviors, and their
algorithms control us even more. We may be paddling our boats, but the
platform is the river, and the algorithms are the current.

Our situation is direr than in Anders' time, with centralized platforms
making it nearly impossible to operate independently online. Geert
Lovink argues the *platform has incorporated and then killed the network
logic* and that talk of decentralized services is now a *farce*.[^17_Treske_Ch14_16]

## §17 Anders

The person being informed is free because he has control over something
absent; unfree because he only receives the predicate instead of the
thing itself. So what is news? What does it do? It informs the person
being informed about something absent in such a way that the person, the
addressee, now knows about the absent indirectly, without his own
experience, based on vicarious *perception*. The appearance of the word
*absent* confirms that we have not left our field of questions,
including the ambiguity of presence and absence.

Social media, as we know it, is a celebration of absence. To speak means
to speak of something absent: to present that which is not present to
someone who is not.

Absence might be close to forgetting.

[^17_Treske_Ch14_1]: Beam me up, Scotty! - Captain Kirk in Enterprise …

[^17_Treske_Ch14_2]: Thorsten Botz-Bornstein, Why Are There So Many Cute Cats on the
    Internet? The World is Driven by a Cute-Excellence Syndrome. LA
    Review of Books. 23 December 2017
    http://blog.lareviewofbooks.org/essays/many-cute-cats-internet-world-driven-cute-excellence-syndrome/
    and Not-so-guilty pleasure: Viewing cat videos boosts energy and
    positive emotions, IU study finds. June 2015
    http://archive.news.indiana.edu/releases/iu/2015/06/internet-cat-video-research.shtml,
    accessed 12 March 2025.

[^17_Treske_Ch14_3]: Sianne Ngai, Our Aesthetic Categories, Harvard University Press
    2015.

[^17_Treske_Ch14_4]: Botz-Bornstein 2017.

[^17_Treske_Ch14_5]: McKenzie Wark. Our Aesthetics. Blog Post 27 June 2017.
    https://www.versobooks.com/blogs/3291-our-aesthetics, accessed 12
    January 2025.

[^17_Treske_Ch14_6]: Ngai 2015.

[^17_Treske_Ch14_7]: Ngai 2015: 171.

[^17_Treske_Ch14_8]: Ngai 2015: 242.

[^17_Treske_Ch14_9]: Hiroki Azuma, Otaku, Japan’s Database Animals, University of
    Minnesota Press 2009.

[^17_Treske_Ch14_10]: Sure Wolton, Marxism, Mysticism and Modern Theory, Springer 2016.
    https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-1-349-24669-4.pdf,
    accessed 12 March 2025.

[^17_Treske_Ch14_11]: Translation from German: Die Welt ist nun zur *Ausstellung*
    geworden, und zwar zu einer Werbeausstellung, die nicht zu besuchen
    unmöglich ist, weil wir uns immer schon ohnehin in ihr befinden
    (Anders 1980a, 161).

[^17_Treske_Ch14_12]: Oliver Marino, Günther Anders’ Theory of Media and Communication:
    Developing a Conception of Technological Domination, Alienation and
    Ideology with Marx beyond Marx. A PhD thesis awarded by the
    University of Westminster.
    https://westminsterresearch.westminster.ac.uk/download/3efa6c34f14faefd556f244c01f6c28b2efa3ddc0852eba61cb3955b6f259d72/3773962/E-Thesis
    Submission.pdf, accessed 12 March 2025

[^17_Treske_Ch14_13]: M. Hauskeller, Promethean Shame and the Engineering of Love. In:
    Sex and the Posthuman Condition. Palgrave Pivot, London 2014.
    *https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137393500\_4*

[^17_Treske_Ch14_14]: Harvard Review of Philosophy Lecture: Babette Babich (Fordham
    University). Günther Anders’ 'Promethean Shame': Technological
    Ressentiment and Surveillance.
    https://philosophy.fas.harvard.edu/event/harvard-review-philosophy-annual-lecture-babette-babich-fordham-university

[^17_Treske_Ch14_15]: Nicholas Mirzoeff, How to See the World. Penguin UK, 4 Haz 2015:
    13.

[^17_Treske_Ch14_16]: Geert Lovink, Requiem for the Network,
    https://networkcultures.org/geert/2020/01/28/geert-lovink-requiem-for-the-network/,
    accessed 12 March 2025.
