---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# LOG:: 14 Generative TeleVisuality

> The starting-point of any study of television must be with what is
> actually there on the screen. This is what content analysis is
> concerned to establish. It is based upon the non-selective monitoring,
> usually by a team of researchers, of the total television output for a
> specified period. It is not concerned with questions of quality, of
> response or of interpretation, but confines itself to the large scale,
> objective survey of manifest content. However, the reading of
> television must progress from the manifest content to the latent
> content, and very few analyst have begun to tread this path.[^18_Treske_Ch15_1]

YouTube dominates watch time across platforms. YouTube is one of the
biggest platforms in music. YouTube is rapidly eating podcasting, and is
now a major cable competitor, and much more. *'If YouTube can make the
big screen and the small screen feel like the same screen, it’ll become
even more unstoppable.*[^18_Treske_Ch15_2]

A year-end update reveals that more people than ever are watching the
video sharing platform on television—an inevitable switch in consumption
habits.[^18_Treske_Ch15_3] Traditional television is evolving into something much more
dynamic and interactive. I like to call or define this transformation as
*Generative Televisualty*.

The concept of *televisuality,* following John Caldwell, reflects on
television as *a system of business conditions, styles, ideologies,
cultural values, modes of production, programming and audience practices
that make up television as a medium within a specific historical and
geographical context*.[^18_Treske_Ch15_4] Caldwell revolutionized television studies by
emphasizing its visual nature and the economic value of program styles,
highlighting the interconnectedness of aesthetics, economics, and
technology in television.

Imagine watching a show that adapts its storyline based on your
reactions, or content that's partially created by artificial
intelligence responding to viewer preferences. This isn't science
fiction; it's happening now. Television is no longer just a one-way
broadcast; it's becoming a conversation between creators, algorithms,
and audiences. That is said in a positive sense.

At the heart of this transformation is the merger of traditional
television with digital technology. Algorithms analyze viewing patterns
and help shape content, while interactive features allow viewers to
influence what they watch in real-time. Social media integration means
audiences can engage with content as it unfolds, creating a feedback
loop that shapes future programming.

Netflix and Hulu analyze our viewing habits to suggest shows and movies
we might enjoy. Viewers get control over what and when to watch,
enabling binge viewing, marathon sessions of entire series. However,
this freedom can lead to a paradox—the more you watch, the harder it
becomes to find fresh content, and recommendations start to feel
repetitive. Meanwhile, platforms like YouTube and Twitch add a social
dimension that traditional television never had, with viewers able to
chat with each other and interact during live streams.

The impact of generative televisuality extends beyond just how we watch
TV. Production teams now use real-time rendering and virtual production
techniques, while AI and machine learning help create and modify
content. The line between producer and consumer is once again blurring,
as viewers become active participants in the evolution of the content
they consume. Viewers need to become creators.

This shift raises questions about the future of storytelling and
narrative. Will our TV shows become completely personalized? How will AI
influence creativity? What happens to shared cultural experiences when
everyone's viewing journey is unique? As technology continues to
advance, television is becoming less of a fixed medium and more of a
dynamic, evolving form of expression that responds and adapts to its
audience in real-time.

Generative AI plays a crucial role in reshaping content creation and
audience engagement. While it offers significant opportunities for
innovation and efficiency, it also presents not yet known challenges; in
particular, authenticity and bias are already obvious. As these
technologies continue to evolve, their impact on both the production
processes and viewer experiences will deepen more.

From game design we have already learned that players easily can destroy
the game experience. It is something naturally to test out the borders,
and it is only consequently that any interactive experience has to be a
controlled and invisible guided experience. You can do only what you are
allowed to do, and you can only get what is in stock. But the stock can
be rendered endlessly.

Together with Aras Ozgün we wrote about how streaming platforms are
reshaping not just what we watch, but how we experience entertainment
itself.[^18_Treske_Ch15_5] Streaming has ended the act of gathering around TV at a
specific time, the common physical sharing of an experience with family
or friends. *Microcasting* has let to a world where algorithms serve up
personalized content just for you. While this customization might seem
convenient, it comes with a trade-off: we're losing those shared
cultural moments that traditional TV once provided. For the first moon
landing, people gathered around television sets and lived every minute
live with the transmission. Today, space travel is shared via social
media, and millions of singled-out people are watching alone on a
personal device. It’s me with the device with the event.

The algorithms that power streaming platforms are like invisible
curators, quietly shaping our viewing habits. They don't just suggest
what to watch next; they're actively molding how we interact with the
library content. It's a bit like having a very attentive but somewhat
controlling friend who's always ready with recommendations, but might be
limiting your exposure to new experiences. The awkward nerd from the
video store took his revenge.

This shift toward personalized viewing has deeper implications for our
society. When everyone is watching different content at different times,
those conversations about last night's big show become increasingly
rare. While we're gaining convenience and personalization, we might be
losing something valuable: the collective experience of shared cultural
moments. I still remember discussing every new episode of Star Trek seen
on the weekend on a Monday morning with my friends while waiting for our
school bus. Now, these discussions have shifted to notes and messages on
WhatsApp, somewhere in the feed.

Yet streaming platforms aren't just passive content delivery systems.
They're constantly evolving, experimenting with new ways to keep us
engaged. As our viewing habits become increasingly personalized and
algorithm-driven, how do we maintain the social connections and shared
cultural experiences that traditionally brought us together through
media?

Rather then praising technology unreservedly, paint doomsday scenarios,
or get lost in economic analysis, we need to dig deeper. We have to
acknowledge how technology is changing our world while maintaining a
thoughtful critical perspective, to gain some distance. We have to stay
away from a *technology is good* versus *technology is bad* debate.
Instead, we need to continue to look at streaming platforms as complex
systems that shape our culture in both visible and invisible ways. We
need to understand how algorithms do more than just recommend content;
they actually influence how we experience and make sense of media. For
this we need to examine the whole system, and the infrastructure that
keeps it running.

Streaming as media practice does not have to be as we now experience it
in 2025. Alternative forms emphasizing participatory culture and
collaboration in content creation and distribution could be facilitated.
Algorithms could be used for fostering critical dialogues.

Creativity and *responsiveness* are the keys for community. Streaming
platforms have the potential for cultural expression, particularly in
times of crisis. They can generate reciprocal changes and therefore
produce *real* interactivity.

We need to address interdisciplinary collaboration, economic
sustainability, alternative revenues, social protocols, digital
platforms, and support innovative formats for artistic expression and
social commentary to challenge traditional and new technological
boundaries.

## The Force again

Yes, we have understood that television shapes our world. TV is more
than just a box that delivers entertainment. It is a powerful force that
actively shapes how we understand reality and experience the world
around us.

I like to recall Paolo Carpignano, who pointed out that television has
the unique ability to create what he calls *present-ness*.[^18_Treske_Ch15_6] Think
about how TV can make millions of people feel like they're experiencing
the same moment together, whether it's a historic event, a sports match,
or a season finale, or the moon landing mentioned earlier. A Taylor
Swift concert live? Carpignano argued that this shared experience is
something special to television, creating a unique kind of intimacy that
bridges the gap between our private lives and the public world.

Something quite profound about television's influence is not just about
what we watch, but how we watch it. The way television presents
information—its visual language, its rhythms, its way of telling
stories—has fundamentally changed how we perceive and remember events.
It's almost as if television has created its own language of experience
that we've all learned to speak. An event did not exist if it was not or
is not broadcasted.

Carpignano's framework of thinking about televisuality proves remarkably
useful in analyzing how streaming services and digital platforms are
transforming our viewing experiences. Even as we have moved away from
traditional TV, many of the conventions and patterns he identified
continue to influence how digital content is created and consumed. It is
as if television's DNA has been passed down to these new forms of media,
shaping how we expect to experience content in the digital age.

•

## The Cybernetic Desert - Intermission by Aras Ozgun[^18_Treske_Ch15_7]

Streaming media technologies transfigured *publics*, founded by print
and broadcast media in modern times. In its new form, the 'audience'
became an amalgamation of individuals, whose aesthetic and ideological
preferences, along with their everyday routines and viewing habits,
could now be quantified and assessed by the platforms, which gradually
gained control over the production of the content as well as its
streaming delivery. The incorporation of generative AI technologies into
contemporary media culture takes place on this ground.

We often hear the complaints (not 'analyses' but indeed complaints)
these days that generative AI technologies will strip humanity of its
creative/intellectual essence. Well, stripping humanity of its
creative/intellectual capacities began when Thomas Edison set up the
Black Maria studio and consequently founded the Motion Picture Patents
Company. Adorno and Horkheimer have already shown that mitigating
critical reason is the operational logic of modern culture industries.
What generative AI technologies actually do today is to remove media
professionals from their 'middleman' position in this process.
Algorithms, instead of producers, determine what people (not a general
audience, but sums of individuals) precisely want, and generative AI
produces that content from script to screen, instead of production
crews.

It is quite interesting that despite the fact that the 'hyper-realism'
of generative AI and Large Language Models (LLM) already provides us
with perfect simulations, we seem to have forgotten Jean Baudrillard and
his criticism organized around the notions of 'hyper-reality' and
'simulacrum'[^18_Treske_Ch15_8]. Baudrillard's criticism was directed towards a highly
saturated, increasingly visual media environment, in which
representations had started to substitute for the ‘real’, and without
any reference to real. The problem, according to Baudrillard, was the
loss of touch with reality at a collective level—the subsumption of the
world outside by televisuality, so to speak. Today’s social media
platforms already become phatic communication domains that channel
massive misinformation flows[^18_Treske_Ch15_9]. Streaming media platforms too, mainly
serve a phatic function by accompanying molar audiences everywhere at
all times on their mobile devices, feeding them nothing but what they
feel they like. At this technological junction, the main promise of
generative AI under platform capitalism is a cybernetic desert, a media
environment devoid of information that representations of secondary
order perpetually reproduce. Information, for Bateson, was a difference
that makes a difference[^18_Treske_Ch15_10]. Whereas what generative AI produces is a
simulation that resembles the same just enough to be able to substitute
it, or reconfigure the parts of the same just enough to create an
illusion of the new.

![](imgs/Treske_Image14.png)
Fig. 14. UNKNOWN

[^18_Treske_Ch15_1]: John Fiske and John Hartley, Reading Television, Routledge, London
    and New York 1988: 21.

[^18_Treske_Ch15_2]: David Pierce. YouTube is a hit on TVs — and is starting to act
    like it. The Verge.
    https://www.theverge.com/2024/12/11/24318434/youtube-living-room-tv-growth-2024
    20 December 2024

[^18_Treske_Ch15_3]: Chris Stokel-Walker. YouTube is taking over TV.
    https://www.fastcompany.com/91246335/youtube-is-taking-over-tv 20
    December 2024

[^18_Treske_Ch15_4]: Redefining Televisuality: Programmes, Practices, Methods.
    International conference. ECREA Television Section Conference 2023.
    Filmuniversität Babelsberg Konrad Wolf, Potsdam, 25-27 October 2023.
    https://www.consultacinema.org/2023/02/27/redefining-televisuality-programmes-practices-methods/

[^18_Treske_Ch15_5]: Aras Özgün and Andreas Tresk3, On Streaming-Media Platforms, Their
    Audiences, and Public Life. Rethinking Marxism, 33(2), 2021:
    304–323. https://doi.org/10.1080/08935696.2021.1893090 and Aras
    Özgün ve Andreas Treske. “Süreğen Medya Platformları: İzleyici
    Etkinliğinin Dönüşümü Ve Toplumsal Etkileri”. Ankara Üniversitesi
    İlef Dergisi, c. 8, sy. 1, 2021, ss. 109-32,
    doi:10.24955/ilef.933277.

[^18_Treske_Ch15_6]: Paolo Carpignano, Televisuality, 31 July 1997. Via Wayback Machine, https://web.archive.org/web/19970731123140/http://www.newschool.edu/mediastudies/tv/televisuality.html

[^18_Treske_Ch15_7]: Aras Ozgun and I worked for some time on streaming media and their
    audiences, which resulted in several published articles. When
    writing, I thought it was needed to ask him to connect these notes
    to our discussion.

[^18_Treske_Ch15_8]: J. Baudrillard, *Simulacra and Simulation* (S. Glaser, Trans.).
    University of Michigan Press 1994.

[^18_Treske_Ch15_9]: Nikhilesh Dholakia, Aras Ozgun & Deniz Atik (2023): The miasma of misinformation: a social analysis of media, markets, and manipulation, Consumption Markets & Culture, DOI: 10.1080/10253866.2022.2149508

[^18_Treske_Ch15_10]: Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind; Collected Essays in
    Anthropology, Psychiatry, Evolution, and Epistemology, San
    Francisco, CA: Chandler 1972.
